Today is April 28th. I will be interviewing Dr.
Alfred D. Fowler. The location for this interview
is in my office in the University Archives. Again,
today's date is Tuesday, April 28th, 1981. One of
the things I ran across in the interview, I was
curious about, and it's not particularly
important, Where did you first hear about the job
at TFS? Was it advertised? At that time, I was
working for the International Paper Company.
There was some sort of a ceremony that took place at
the Spring Hill Mill of the company. I can't
remember now what it was. But...
I attended. Maybe I just decided I wanted to go, or
maybe I had gotten an invitation. I don't remember
that. But at any rate, I ran across two foresters
there from Texas. One was Balzer Koontz, who I had
gotten acquainted with many, many years before in
Florida. In the early 30s.
He had lost a job during the Depression with Long
Bell, who employed him originally in Texas and
Louisiana.
You've heard of the Long Bell Company? Okay. And
Don Young, they... had known each other because
Kuntz, when he left Florida, he married a Texas
girl. He's a native of Indiana. Started at Purdue
in forestry, then transferred to Syracuse, and
then from Syracuse he got this job with Long Bell.
And he had married a Texan, gotten acquainted with
her in Jasper. Although her home had been in Fort
Stockton way out west. At any rate, not a tree for
miles. She
had, well, when he was out of a job, I think that they
voluntarily came back to Texas. He made a
connection with the Texas Forest Service and then
from the Texas Forest Service He went into the
pupwood business. Well, he at that time was
shipping wood to International Paper, the Spring
Hill Mill. That's why he was there. And whether he
and Young traveled over there again, I don't know.
But anyway, I ran across these two fellows. And
like all of us do, we jobbed home for a while. And
Kuhn facetiously, I think, said to me, Well, I
guess you know that there's a vacancy over here in
Texas for the directorship of the Texas Forest
Service. And Don Young chimed in, somewhat the
same effect. At the moment, it didn't leave much of
an impression with me because I was reasonably
happy in the job that I had. And... A little while
later, I thought it over after I left there, and I
thought, well, maybe I'll put in an application
for the job over there, largely because I
recognized that my opportunity for any
advancement in the International Paper Company
was quite limited for two reasons. One, I hadn't
been with the company very long. I was employed by
the company in 19, end of 1945, after I came out of
military service, largely because of the
influence of Earl Porter, who was at that time in
charge of procurement for the company in this
southern region, and as one who was in charge of
procurement, that is, of wood. He also had charge
of land. But there was somebody immediately below
him who administered land, a fellow by the name of
Fogelberg, whom I had run across many years before
in Florida. Well, at any rate, Earl
Porter hired me. I had hired him during the CCC days
while I was director of the CCC camps in Florida. He
was out of a job or... was on the verge of being eased
out during that deep depression. He was employed
by the
Foley Lumber Company at Foley, Florida. At any
rate, Earl hired me, and then as time evolved,
In the early, for the first two years, the 47th and
48th, things went swimmingly for me in Winfield,
where I was located in charge of IP lands west of
Mississippi. But then younger men were also
released from the military service, fellows who
previously had been employed by IP. Well, I soon
recognized that those younger men were going to be
given better opportunities for advancement than
I because of those two reasons that I mentioned, my
age and not having had any previous experience
with IP. I don't think times have changed too much
now. I think you'd find the same thing if you were in
that position in 1981 as you would have in 1947.
Probably so. Probably so. It's natural, I guess. I
suppose. But anyway, I'm not going to elaborate on
that. Anyway, it's water. Yeah. So I had gotten
acquainted, these fellows had told me that the man
who would probably make the decision about the
employment of a director was D.W. Williams. My
ears came up like that because I had gotten
acquainted with D.W. while we were both in
military service. I got acquainted with him in
in Shrivenham, England. Run that name by again.
S-H-R-I-V-E-N-H-A-M.
Okay. And Shrivenham was the place name of what had
been the English equivalent or British
equivalent of our West Point, but during the war it
had no useful purpose anymore and was turned over
to U.S. military forces. Is that where Sandhurst
is located?
I don't know, I can't relate to Shrivenham
military installation with Sandhurst. I don't
know where Sandhurst is or where it ever was. But at
any rate, Shrivenham was a military
installation. And I was told that it was the
equivalent of our West Point, but I had no reason to
pursue it. That's where we people who were in
military government were being, I guess you could
say, put in storage until there was a use for us.
Until the Channel Crossing? Yeah. Do you remember
the exact title of this command that you were in?
Was it just military government or did it have some
officious title? Well, let's see, the title I
guess would
At the moment, I can't remember. Okay, well, it may
have just been that. But we had a designation of G5
in the entire military structure. Okay, I bet I can
find out. I'm not sure how important it is. I am
curious to know about what you learned from your
military experience. Did it help you in
administration? Did you learn? No. You didn't
feel like the military was beneficial to your own
personal knowledge in any way? Could be. Might
have been.
I won't go into that, but I had a screwy experience
in my military
contacts with the military. Was D.W. over you? No,
no. He was just there. He was just there. He had the
rank of major, and I had the rank of captain. But we
all had commissions. They were made up of entirely
commissioned personnel. Those people are true.
You never met Henry Kissinger, did you? Oh, Lord,
no. He was in that. Yeah, but that was after the
crossing and in connection with displaced
personnel. I was never identified with that in any
way. Did you stay with military government your
entire time in the Army? No, thank God. It was the
most screwed up outfit I've ever had my misfortune
of Being a part of it. Then where to after military
government? Well, I wangled a transfer to the
Corps of Engineers. Ah, something you knew
something about. In the Third Army, too. Pattons.
Yeah. Were you all just attached to the Corps of
Engineers? No, no. Do you really want me to go into
these things? I'm just curious. I'm not going to
write about it, but I'm curious. All right, I'll
satisfy your curiosity because I like to talk
about this. While we were driven and we were
essentially killing time So we would wangle or
there would be organized trips. And I was on a trip
to Oxford. And I had remembered back from my days at
Yale that Oxford had a course in tropical
forestry. And on the faculty there was a man by the
name of, what the hell, I don't remember at the
moment what it was. So when we got to Oxford, I made
it a point to find out where this School of Tropical
Forestry was situated on the campus, and I went
around there, and I learned that this man... I wish
I could remember. It'll come back to me tomorrow.
That's not important. He was in military service.
He had the rank of brigadier. And
he was in military service, and as a matter of fact,
he was looking for some foresters. So this person I
talked to at Oxford said, well, I carried this
story around with me for a while, several weeks,
and then I ran across a fellow also at Shrivenham,
whose name I can't remember at the moment, this is
my old age catching up with me, who had a greater
rank than I. He had the rank of major then. Well, he
picked up his ears, and through a whole series of
odd circumstances, there was a unit within the
engineer section at the Towsa level, ETOWSA
stands for European Theater of U.S. Forces. There
was a unit within that engineer section of ETOWSA
created that would be composed entirely of
graduate foresters for the purpose of being
deployed among our personnel, U.S. personnel, so
that we wouldn't raise hell with the European
foresters like had occurred in World War I. With
the 10th and 20th Engineers. And this brigadier
had been involved in this whole thing in World War
I, this English brigadier. And he was
responsible, as I said, for trying to have some
foresters set up as a unit within the U.S. forces to
do exactly what I mentioned. And then we in this
unit were splattered out among the armies on the
continent, and I was assigned to Third Army.
Oh, I wish I could remember that fellow's name who
commanded the unit. Well, it's not important what
his name was. But at any rate, he said, while we were
with the military government, we all wore the
unassigned insignia. You know what that is? He
used to refer to it as a birdcage. But anyway,
when Stan was his first name, maybe I'll think of
his name before. Stan said, now let's get rid of
these damn birdcages. Let's start to wear the
engineer corps symbol. Okay, who was there to say
that we couldn't? All of us trotted out to a supply
store and... got Corps of Engineers insignia,
which we probably started to wear after that.
Fortunately, nobody challenged it. Well,
eventually, because of the screwed-up
situation, I managed to officially get
transferred to the Third Army Corps of Engineers
supply officer. And that's where I was. And in the
meanwhile, while I was still attached to Itaza, I
had authority to cross Army lines if I needed to.
And our mission after I got to, was to keep the Paris
office informed. That was where Itaza was
situated at the time. On what the timber supply
situation was in each of the armies and what was
being done about it. Well, I could elaborate on
that, but at any rate... That sounds like a
horrendous job. Oh, it's... You could goof off
100% of the time if you wanted to, you know. In other
words, you could just guess at what it was. I
certainly could. But I had a Jeep and a driver at my
disposal. And I had the sort of travel orders where
I could stop any place I wanted to. You weren't
involved. When the Third Army moved across
Europe, they moved rather fast. You weren't
having to keep up with them? No, I was not with Third
Army at that time. Oh, okay. I was just curious if
you were attached to Third Army, if you were forced
to constantly move the way they moved. No, no, no.
This arrangement didn't take place until things
had started to stabilize somewhat, that Third
Army wasn't moving like it had. I remember, for
example, I was with... I wasn't assigned to Third
Army, but I was with Third Army at the time of the
German breakthrough through the Ardennes. And I
got word from the Paris office, Army
headquarters, I don't mean Army, I mean ETASA
headquarters, to come back to Paris and tell them
what the score was. Hell, this was just, I had a
little curiosity on, on the part of the fellow that
headed up our particular unit. Where were you when
the Ardennes breakout started? Do you remember?
I'm trying to remember. I was in France somewhere.
I don't exactly remember. I think it was in the area
just west of Metz. Okay. Did you ever run across the
26th Division? Any of those people? I'm just
curious. My father was in the 26th Division with
the Third Army. When the war ended, he was in
Czechoslovakia. Oh, is that so? Yeah. Well, let's
get back up to the Forest Service. There's a
question I want to ask you about. Well, at any rate,
I got back home, and I thought about it. I wrote to
DW. I said, I heard that you have a vacancy in the
position of the director of Texas Forest Service.
I got a response from him. We arranged for
interviews, and the sum and substance of it was
that he and Chancellor Gale Christ and I met in
Lufkin.
This must have been in November, December 1948.
And a kid wanted to get acquainted with me, I guess.
And the upshot of it was I was offered the job, and I
accepted, and I reported here January 1, 1949.
Question. In some of these old papers that I found,
it says during your interviews that you were also
interviewed by a board from the Texas Forestry
Association. I have no recollection. You don't
remember meeting with any of those people? No.
Because they were rather favorably impressed
with you, according to this. Either that or
Gilchrist is making it up as he goes along. I have no
recollection of meeting anybody from the Texas
Forestry Association. It may have happened. You
may not have known who they were. Yeah, they may not
have identified themselves, but a few years ago, a
fellow by the name of Eck...
Well, he was at that time a member of the board of the
Texas Forestry Association. He's older than I am.
Made the remark to me that he and he mentioned the
other two men Went to Austin to recommend to the
governor that I be designated as the director of
the Texas Forest Service. I want to stop, just a
moment.
I don't . He's the one that told me about that. Gib
Gilchrist wrote to . a guy by the name of Ruth, it's
Peoples. Yeah. Who was on the board. Who was on the
board, yeah. And it said, this morning we talked
with a committee from the Texas Forestry
Association, and they believe that Fowler's
experience is just what we will need. And Gibb put
out some letters to the members of the board, wrote
glowing letters. Which board? The board of? Our
board. Oh, the board of directors of A&M. Okay. And
so the only thing I was curious about when all this
was going on was that... Did you get any idea of what
A&M was looking for when they hired you? Somewhere
in here I read they had about 40 applicants. Forty?
Yeah, that were sent. I've got a few letters
saying, yeah, we'll file them with the rest. But
there's something about you that's different. I
don't think any other PhDs applied. No, because
PhDs in the ministry were as scarce as hen's teeth
at that time. did you get any impression from
Gilchrist that this was a way to upgrade? They
would be concerned with it now. I doubt if they
would have. Well, I don't know that they would have
then, but I was thinking if maybe Gilchrist is
saying, here's a man with broad experience. He's
got state experience. He's got private industry.
He's got some federal work. He has the academic
credentials. Well, I was also on the faculty for
almost 10 years at LSU. Yeah, so he's got the
academic credentials. Here's a man that is both
industry and both academic. And they wouldn't
have had anything. Now, people within the Forest
Service applied for this job. And I got letters in
here from Don Young and Ann . All these people had
applied. But from looking over it, then there was
no question. On paper, you had to be the best
credential-wise. And I was just wondering if
Forest Service, where they said, he's the best
man. We want to upgrade the directorship of the
program from what it was. We're going to get a
high-powered individual in here. I just wondered
if there was any feeling that you got that they were
going to upgrade. Well, I was told by Kuntz over
there at that meeting at Spring Hill when we were
attending that I've heard they're willing to pay
as much as $10,000 if they get the right man. Why?
Oh, I don't know. I'm curious about that. Why
suddenly do they care? I don't know. I don't see any
evidence of caring in the past. No, you're so
right. You're so right. Which reminds me that soon
after I came here, I
was somewhat conscious of public relations, and I
arranged to set up an advisory committee of nine
people to be appointed for two-year periods.
eventually getting into an overlapping
situation like they have on the board of directors
here in the regions. Gibb wouldn't hear of two
years. One year was all right. So he attended the
first meeting. One of the men that I had persuaded
to be a member represented the champion paper, and
he was a pretty blunt sort of fellow. He said to Gib
Gilchrist, why does the Texas Forest Service
always have to suck in the hind tit of this A&M cow?
And it was certainly true that they had done that.
Do you remember who that was that said that? Oh, the
name of Crow. Crow. C-R-O-W-R-O-W. I don't have an
old list of that thing. I've got some of the later
ones in the 50s, and I don't have his... I imagine if
I look real hard, I can find it. What gave you the
idea for setting up the advisory committee? Well,
there, somehow I think I had picked up the idea that
there wasn't any communication really between
the industry that was a principal, had the
principal interest in the Texas Forest Service
because of controlled fire, and the
organization. So I thought, well, there are less,
more landowners interested in this, too, I would
suppose. And I thought, well, this will be a means
whereby they'll be willing to tell me,
because there are several of them, what they
think, what ways in which the Texas Forest Service
could be improved. Was this a conscious public
relations effort on your part, in a way? Yeah,
yeah. It would work both ways. Here you are stuck in
College Station. Not stuck, but the headquarters
is here. And it's a way to get them over here and to
talk about things? Or did you go to them? No. We had
these meetings here in College Station in the
director's office. So it was nice to get industry
in one location, at least leaders of industry,
rather than you making a circuit around.
I suppose I could have gotten this same thing from
the Texas Forestry Association. But the Texas
Forestry Association at that time was something
of a non-entity. And I didn't think well of it
because while I was in Louisiana, another fellow
and I were instrumental in creating the Louisiana
Forestry Association. I'm surprised they didn't
have one before then. Well, they had sort of a
half-assed organization over there. It was led by
a man by the name of Hartner from Urania, and he was
something of a leader in forestry. He was one of the
very, very few sawmillers who was trying to
practice some semblance of forestry. Yes. In
fact, he was, Goodrich Jones used to refer to him as
the first, and got into a big argument with Lynch
Davidson over Lynch Davidson claiming he had been
over every inch of Urania land, and Goodrich wrote
to Hartner. Hartner said, I've never seen a man on
my land before he's lying. Okay. So one quick
question about Louisiana. You ever heard of a man
by the name of Forbes? R.D. Forbes. What did R.D.
stand for, do you know? Reginald.
Damn, I remember what his middle name is. That's
good enough. Reginald Denny Forbes, I think.
Reginald? R.D. Forbes. He was director of the
Southern Forest Experiment Station. Okay,
because he at one time was, of course, a state
forester in Louisiana in the early years. One of
their first. Very short time. And then he went on
someplace else. But he was over in Texas helping
out with Texas Forestry Association at one time.
Oh, is that so? Oh, he came over to speak. They
traded people back and forth, that sort of thing.
When you... first took over the Texas Forest
Service, what did you find? A demoralized
organization. Why demoralized? Well, I don't
think that White ever exerted much leadership. He
succeeded Siki as state forester. And then Frost
was acting. He was acting, and then Anderson was
acting, and... Frankly, I don't know why Frost
wasn't selected. But I think maybe some of the
people in the industry felt that nobody from
within the organization should be selected as
director, because that would cause too much
cleavage. Don Young had Kurth's backing
initially, or at least the company had. Ernest
Kurth? Well, through one of his minions. OK.
Through the lumber company initially. Well, Don,
you see, would have contact with, because his job
in the Texas Forest Service was contacting
industry. Yes, yes. So you found it demoralized,
you feel, because of lack of leadership on White's
part. Curious thing that I don't know is that
during World War II, I don't know what the problems
were in the industry or within the Forest Service,
there was Pretty good expansion during World War
II as far as buying equipment that they never had.
They didn't have a mechanized tractor until 1941.
They got them two-wheel tractors. They got five of
them. And then they'd be able to, with those
federal emergency funds, they purchased
equipment and I guess got to keep it. Oh, yeah. And
there was expansion. I'm sure there were some
personnel problems. I'm sure there was a shortage
of manpower during the war. Yes. But I didn't see
anything within that part I looked at. It looked
like nice growth, a few new programs, the war ends,
and then it turned sour on him. Something had to
have happened to White. I don't know what it was,
whether this lack of leadership finally got him in
a whole lot of trouble, that the thing fell apart on
him. Well, one handicap that Bill had was that his
wife would never come over here to live. He
married... woman in Lufkin. You see, he was chief
of the fire control section. His responsibility
was fire. Had been since 1930. Well, I don't know
how far back that went. Well, at any rate, then when
he was selected for a job that was vacated by Siki,
she wouldn't come over here and live with him.
She'd visit occasionally.
Bill was operating under something of a handicap,
I'd say. Maybe that affected his general attitude
toward the job. I have a sneaking suspicion he
somehow got crossways with Gilchrist. Not, I
still... We didn't have much time to because the
system organization wasn't created until just
about a year, year and a half before I came here.
Gilchrist had been president and he'd been
reporting to Gilchrist. Oh, I don't know. I guess
so. I have a feeling that something happened in
there. I think the event that caused the thing that
everybody talks about is just a tip. Could be. This
was like an excuse to get rid of somebody. Could be.
Maybe Anderson has something on it. He'll have an
opinion, I'm sure. But it just seemed to me that
something went wrong between 1945 and 1948. Could
be. Something really went wrong. So you found a
demoralized agency. And the finances were in a
shambles. Why? What damn if I know? They just
weren't, huh? They were in a shambles because Bill
White didn't concern himself any. There was no
financial control at all? Hardly any. That was one
of the first things I did. Can you tell me anything
about financial control, just in a nutshell? I'm
not sure I understand your question. About what it
is that you did to establish financial control.
Oh, well, first of all, I created a budget. He never
had a budget before? Not that I know of. Oh, there
was a semblance of one. He had to have something to
present to the U.S. Forest Service. Yeah, the
Clark McNary reports had something of it, but it
was more of an after-the-fact. Yeah. And the state
budget was broken down broadly. Very broadly.
What kind of a budget did you prepare? Was it a, what
are the terms they use now? I'm not an accountant.
There are several types of budgets. Well, I
created an overall budget for the agency, broken
down by departments and by districts. Also, I
created an organization in the field which really
hadn't existed. What's that? Well, I created six
districts, administrative districts. Up until
that time, there had been no real field activity
other than fire control, and fire control
operated out of Joe Burnside's desk over in
Lufkin. Just out of his desk? Yeah. Now, the six
districts then, did they not have anything, if
this straightens my mind, they weren't then
necessarily controlled with fire control? No.
That was a major function. So the only
organization really in East Texas up until you
came was the fire control organization. Right. A
highly decentralized organization. Did you not
reduce the number of divisions also? Weren't
there five when you came and you reorganized it
down to four? Four. Do you recall why? Or just made
it streamlined or more efficient? I don't know
why. I wasn't conscious of the fact that there were
five. Well, I set it up. I guess, yes.
Well, I would have to scratch my head more than I can
right now. But I don't remember what the five might
have been, but we had four. One was forest
products, fire control, management, and I&E.
They don't break it down in some of these older
reports as to what they were. They would say,
forest management, industrial forestry. Well,
excuse me, that industrial forestry was
contained in one person, Coons, at this point.
Well, later on by Don Young. Yeah. Civil cultural
research, forest products research, and then
they had it broken down by the nursery. Then they
just called it information. Well, I'll tell you,
the fifth one was research. Okay. I eliminated
that. And put it under what? Well, I eliminated
research as a function. You didn't do any more
research at that point? No. No, my position was
that with a very, very limited budget that we had,
we had no damn business doing research. Well, good
question, because what I did was, in looking
through the war years, They didn't do a whole lot of
research until World War II, and then they just
kind of played with it, and it looked to me as if they
were redoing research that was being done by the
federal people already. Oh, they were messing
around with it. Dave Anderson was messing around
with it. Okay. They were making plastics out of
pecan holes. Well, now that was done over at the
Forest Products Laboratory. Yeah. Now, you
didn't close that, did you? No, no. But you moved
them under someone else? No, that was a...
Separate situation now. No. Essentially, what
the Forest Products... Department, and it's
called LAB now. Well, essentially what they did
over there was conducted investigative
projects. Well, I guess you could, if you use the
word research very broadly, you could say, yes,
they did forest products research. I see. Okay.
Well, you can see the limitations in my
understanding, and looking at it from the
outside, I get this back and forth.
Okay, well, what you did, in effect, was really
just kind of streamline the whole thing, get rid of
unnecessary elements. You felt research was...
Well, there was a lack of cohesion in the whole
effort. Who was doing the... Now, this research,
where was it being carried on? Here? No. No, which
research? Well, you were talking about... There
are two types of research. The one that you're
getting... I'd like to know about the one that you
wanted to get rid of. Civil cultural research.
Civil cultural research. That was... Dave
Anderson headed that up here, and he had... a
subordinate over at Kirbyville by the name of Ted
Silker. Okay. Ted did all the work and Andy did the
supervising. From here? Yeah. It's kind of long
distance. Oh, sure. Okay.
And White condoned all of this long distance kind
of operation? Oh, sure. Or did he just not care? I
don't think he cared. He wasn't interested in
research. Well, he didn't have enough budget to be
Not having any. He didn't have enough budget to
have fat in it. In such a tiny little budget. I don't
know what it was. Well, it wasn't much. It was damn
small, I know, when I came here. It's not real large
now compared to other things. Well, it's
amazingly large considering what the job is.
Okay.
So, in a way, now you've made the Forest Service
more efficient. Now, demoralized problems,
That's a morale problem within the, what'd you do
about that? Or could you do it? Well, there wasn't
much I could do about it. Yeah. But, see, here was
Joe Burnside. He wanted to be director, too. I
don't know how hard he tried, but he would have
liked to have been director. I think everybody
would have. As a matter of fact, this is kind of
small of me to mention, but I will anyway. Not long
after I got here, and I was trying to organize a
budget. I was talking to Joe Burnside over there in
his office, and he showed me a budget that he had
prepared for the Texas Forest Service, and he had
shown how much my salary should be.
That illustrates the lack of finesse that Joe had.
Joe, in some respects, was... He was a pretty good
organizer. He was overburdened, though, with
formalities and forms. He was over-organized
considering what he had to work with. He was pretty
much desk-bound, too. But morale was really not
much you could do other than— See, I inherited
these fellows. Oh, yeah. Now, anybody that comes
in is going to inherit a lot of problems. Did you get
rid of any people? No, I didn't. Finally, I made
things uncomfortable enough where Gene, a fellow
over at the Forest Products Department, had left
him. So he left. So you only had a minor shakeup in
personnel over a period of time. Yeah. Did you
bring in any of your own people? No, I had nobody to
bring in. There was nobody that you... Many times
administrators coming in want to bring in some of
their people. No, in my case, there wasn't anybody
I wanted to bring in with me. Okay. Well, then you
decided to up your PR standards by creating the
advisory committee. Of course, this may have been
a help also to morale. If industry took an interest
in you, maybe that would have been expressed back
through the field, and if your people felt like
industry was interested, that might have helped.
It might have a double effect. It might have. I'm
not sure, though, about that. One, the people that
were in before you left, both Anderson and
Frost... Before I left? I mean, before you came, I
get the impression they were just caretakers.
Essentially, yeah. They couldn't make any real
decisions. Once I asked D.W. Williams, well, I
guess I should have been a little more subtle than I
was, but... I'm the sort of fellow that's not as
subtle as I should be. I'm a little blunt. I said to
DW, why didn't you people make Anderson director?
DW, he's a pretty subtle sort of fellow. I said, oh,
we didn't think he was quite ready for it. And that
was the end of that.
Yeah. I just wondered. It's funny that they
brought, of course, they brought you in. Frost, I
mean, White was the first one ever hired who had
been brought up through the ranks. They'd all come
in from the outside before. But he didn't have many
ranks to draw on. No, that's true. And, you know,
today, it's funny that they've now done it twice
with both Kramer and Bruce Miles. Yeah. Well, now,
there's a pretty fair organization from which to
draw on now. Yeah, yeah, yeah, considerably.
everything being relative, it is huge compared to
what it was. Yeah.
Well, was there anything else that you noticed
that you could do anything about when you first
came in? Well, that's— It sounds like an abysmal
problem in a way that you've got an— No, no, really I
enjoyed the first few years of reorganization. I
instituted financial control. There hadn't been
any control before by the budgetary process. The
service had a budget. Every department had a
budget. Every district had a budget. Previously,
they were just spending money, sending in the
receipt for it. It goes on the book, and when they
ran out, they ran out. Well, essentially, that's
what it was. It wasn't quite that bad, but not a
whole lot better. Okay. Okay. All right. You can't
really do anything unless you have budgetary
control. No, that's exactly right. You can't,
because you'll just wind up in the middle of the
year. And I'm naturally inclined that way, and I
had had pretty good experience with IP in this. IP?
International Paper. Okay.
If you were writing about your tenure in the Forest
Service, what points would you want to include? If
you were writing about it, think about important
things done, something of significance, what
would you include? Well,
I'd say I modernized fire control because of
getting larger appropriations. That was a crying
need. That's the most important thing they
needed. Particularly communications, for
example. There were hundreds of miles of grounded
telephone line that were used for communications
from tower to tower and tower to offices and so on. I
eliminated all that and replaced it. I shouldn't
say I, but we eliminated that. But you directed.
And converted it to radio. That was the first big
step. There was some radio previous to your...
Damn little. And I'm wondering if some of it was
even gone by the time you got there. There was a good
bit during the war. There was a remnant of it up in
Linden, but that was about all. There were five...
base radio stations during the Second World War
that they had going, mostly with used Philco
equipment. And they even got radios into their
Jeeps. But I have a feeling all this Army stuff
finally broke down and they were unable to replace
it. Could be. I think it was Comshaw from the Army.
But okay, that's an important point. It's
something I don't pick up by reading annual
reports, that the equipment breaks down and if you
can't replace it, it's like you never had it
almost. What else can you recall in your tenure?
Well, then eventually we got away from the use of
lookout towers for detection. We went to
aircraft, partly on a supplemental basis, and
then finally on a total basis. When you arrived as
director, do you remember how many aircraft they
owned? Oh, they were piddling around. They
owned... two or three small planes. The Swifts?
Yeah. Okay. Well, one was a Moody II, I think. Okay.
Then where did you try to push your air
observation? Through your own Air Force? No, I
decided the hell with trying to maintain these
planes. We are going to rent them. From whom then
did What kind of companies? Did you rent pilots? Do
you have your own pilots? No, we rented planes
complete with pilots, and we trained the pilots in
how to identify, how to communicate with the
district office as to where the fire was situated.
Now, in this connection, too, we didn't have any
maps. So we went in the map-making business. yours
was about the fourth effort at the map-making
basis. Oh? CCC tried. They were unreliable. Oh, of
course. For fire control purposes. It seems like
every director since Foster has been trying to
make maps of Texas. They do a pretty good job now. At
least they're nice looking. Well, oh yeah,
there's a big improvement over what was there.
Well, we... did go into the map-making business
because we used as base maps the mapping that had
been done in connection with
soil, with allotments for crops. Triple A? Triple
A. We started with them as a base. These were soil
conservation maps that they started with? I don't
know where they... Soil conservation maps were
made up from these AAA maps, I think. So you had a
mapping problem. Did you ever complete the
problem? Yeah, yeah. We knew that this is
something that had gone continuously because of
the modifications of the landscape. Time out just
a moment.